.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.TH VATOMIC 7 "@__DATE__@" "vatomic @__VERSION__@" "Miscellaneous Information Manual"
.SH NAME
vatomic \- formally-verified atomic operations library
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
vatomic is a header-only library that provides a rich set of atomic operations
for mainstream architectures, including ARMv7, ARMv8 (AArch32 and AArch64),
RISC-V, and x86_64.
Its interface matches the guarantees described by the VSync Memory Model
(\fBvmm.cat\fP), allowing developers to reason about memory ordering using the
same formal description employed by the library itself.
.PP
The library exposes both a low-level core interface and higher-level await and
dispatch helpers, all implemented in portable C with architecture-specific
backends when required.
Because the headers adhere to the VSync model, programs that rely on vatomic
can be verified with model checkers such as Dartagnan or vsyncer by reusing
the provided cat specification.
.SH ATOMIC TYPES
.PP
vatomic defines fixed-width atomic wrappers matching their unsigned integral
counterparts: \fBvatomic8_t\fP, \fBvatomic16_t\fP, \fBvatomic32_t\fP,
\fBvatomic64_t\fP, and \fBvatomicsz_t\fP for size_t.
Pointer atomics are represented by \fBvatomicptr_t\fP while
\fBvatomicptr(T)\fP documents the pointee type at the declaration site.
Each type pairs with a non-atomic counterpart
(\fBuint8_t\fP, \fBuint16_t\fP, etc.) to describe the underlying storage used
by the read/modify/write helpers.
.SH MEMORY ORDERS
.PP
All operations accept a \fBvsync_memory_order\fP suffix:
\fB_rlx\fP (relaxed), \fB_acq\fP (acquire), and \fB_rel\fP (release).
Operations without such a suffix are sequentially consistent.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.PP
The header \fBvsync/atomic/config.h\fP defines project-wide switches that can be
set before including the core header:
.TP
.B VATOMIC_DISABLE_POLITE_AWAIT
Forces busy-wait loops to spin without issuing PAUSE/WFE instructions on x86_64
and arm64, overriding the default polite behavior.
.TP
.B VATOMIC_BUILTINS
Builds every atomic primitive using the compiler's \fB__atomic\fP builtins.
When unset, the library selects hand-written assembly backends for arm32/arm64
when appropriate.
.TP
.B VATOMIC_ENABLE_ATOMIC_SC
Upgrades every operation and fence to sequential consistency regardless of the
requested memory order.
.TP
.B VATOMIC_ENABLE_ATOMIC_RLX
Forces all operations and fences to behave as relaxed atomics. This option is
only relevant for testing.
.TP
.B VATOMIC_DISABLE_ARM64_LSE
Disables use of ARMv8 LSE instructions even when the toolchain advertises them.
.TP
.B VATOMIC_ENABLE_ARM64_LXE
Enables ARMv8 LSE instructions in the slow path of LLSC operations whenever the
compiler is configured with \fB-march=armv8-a+lse\fP or equivalent.
.PP
vatomic is a component of the broader VSync effort and is also used by
libvsync.
Refer to the project documentation and ASPLOS'21 publication for more detail on
the research behind the library.
.SH REFERENCES
.IP \(bu 2
Oberhauser et al., "VSync: push-button verification and optimization for
synchronization primitives on weak memory models," ASPLOS 2021,
<https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3445814.3446748>.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B include/vsync/atomic/doc.h
Top-level documentation stub mirrored by this manual page.
.TP
.B vmm.cat
VSync Memory Model specification referenced throughout the interface.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBvmm.cat\fP,
\fBvsync/atomic/core.h\fP,
the project README, and the VSync documentation hosted in the \fBdoc/\fP tree.
